Figure 7–8. Relation between so­dium and extracellular .uid (ECF) volume. Each large rectangle repre­sents total-body water divided into 
Excess sodium and water 

an ICF (open areas) and ECF (shaded areas). The ECF is further subdivided into interstitial and plasma volumes. Excess sodium is almost always ac­companied by water, so that excess sodium causes an expansion of the ECF volume. If there is no change in 
without excess water, as shown in 
the bottom example, water is drawn from the ICF to maintain equal osmolalities between compartments. In both cases of excess sodium, the increase in ECF volume causes an increase in both plasma and inter­stitial volumes. ICF, intracellular .uid; ECF, extracellular .uid. 
If it controls volume, then it controls pressure. This raises the following question: How do the kidneys know about sodium content so that they can respond to changes? Surprisingly, in detecting total body sodium, the primary variable that the kidney monitors is not a direct measure of the amount of sodium in the body or plasma sodium concentration but rather pressures in various parts of the vascu­lar tree and in the kidneys that we have already described. Pressure changes at any of these sites are interpreted as a change in total body sodium because, except for pathophysiological circumstances, blood pressure, blood volume, and total body sodium march in lockstep. 
Sodium content and blood pressure can be too high or too low. Some of the mechanisms that control sodium excretion mainly serve to correct elevated pres-sure/high sodium content, while others mainly correct low pressure/low sodium content. Still others come into play with deviations in either direction. This bi­directional responsiveness applies to the .rst control mechanism we discuss— control of glomerular .ltration rate (GFR). 
Control of Glomerular Filtration Rate 
Because sodium excretion represents the di.erence between .ltration and reab­sorption, it is not surprising that one of the major controls over sodium excretion is the regulation of GFR. A change in the amount of sodium .ltered resulting from a change in GFR is also accompanied by a change in the amount of water .ltered. Therefore, any change in GFR represents a mechanism for altering ECF volume. 
The re.ex control of GFR is mediated mainly by changing the resistance of the a.erent and e.erent arteriolar resistance. The changes in resistance are pro­duced by changes in renal sympathetic nerve activity and circulating levels of 

osmolality, as shown in the middle example, the expansion is entirely in the ECF and there is no change in ICF volume. If there is excess sodium 


angiotensin II. (As described later, antidiuretic hormone [ADH] and natriuretic peptide hormones can also play signi.cant physiological roles under certain cir­cumstances.) These re.exes and the detailed mechanisms by which they lower GFR have already been described in Chapter 2 (see Figures 2–6 to 2–10). 
Renal sympathetic nerve activity and renin secretion are decreased re.exively when plasma volume is increased physiologically. However, in a person ingesting the usual American diet, which contains relatively large amounts of sodium, sym­pathetic activity is usually so low that a further decrease has little or no e.ect on GFR (or renal blood .ow [RBF]). 

Control of Sodium Excretion Directly by Angiotensin II 
We discussed above the powerful e.ect angiotensin II has on blood pressure by al­tering peripheral vascular resistance, but within the kidneys angiotensin II also ex­erts a direct and signi.cant sodium-retaining action via several mechanisms. (1) It vasoconstricts renal arterioles (as it does arterioles elsewhere), thereby reducing re­nal blood .ow and GFR. (2) It constricts glomerular mesangial cells, also reducing GFR. (3) It stimulates sodium reabsorption in the proximal tubule by stimulating Na-H exchange. When the levels of angiotensin II are high, the kidneys .lter less sodium and reabsorb more, thereby greatly reducing the amount excreted. In con­trast, when there is little angiotensin II, large amounts of sodium remain in the tubule and are .nally excreted. Thus, variation in levels of angiotensin II is a very powerful bidirectional response system that allows the kidneys to correct either an elevation or depression in blood pressure. When the body becomes sodium-loaded or pressure remains high, little angiotensin II is produced and the kidneys permit a large amount of sodium to be excreted. However, in volume depletion (ie, loss of sodium and water) or a sustained decrease in arterial pressure, angiotensin II levels are high and the kidneys retain sodium. This stabilizes sodium content, and there­fore ECF volume, at a level appropriate for keeping blood volume normal. 

Pressure Natriuresis and Diuresis 
The mechanism by which angiotensin II directly alters proximal reabsorption of sodium in response to high pressure is called pressure natriuresis (and because na­triuresis tends to increase water excretion, it can be properly called pressure natri­uresis and diuresis). The kidney, in e.ect, excretes isotonic urine to reduce blood volume (and blood pressure). Major increases in renal artery pressure are detected by the intrarenal baroreceptors, ie, pressure natriuresis and diuresis are not turned 
Figure 7–9. Renal response to sodium loads. A, Sodium load accompanied by a water load. Volume expansion signals an increase in GFR and decrease in proximal tubule so­dium reabsorption, causing increased delivery of sodium and water to the distal nephron and eventual excretion. B, Sodium load without water. Sodium expands the ECF by draw­ing water from the ICF, leading to an increase in GFR and reduction in proximal tubule reabsorption. The increase in ECF osmolality signals increased secretion of ADH, causing increased reabsorption of water in the distal nephron. This o.sets the increased delivery of water from the proximal tubule, resulting in no change in water excretion. 
on by external signals. The high pressure reduces levels of intrarenal angiotensin 
II. The number of Na-H exchangers in the apical membrane is strongly in.uenced by angiotensin II. When its levels fall, Na-H exchangers are withdrawn, along with a concomitant reduction in the activity of the basolateral Na-K-ATPase. The result of the reduction in angiotensin II in response to high renal artery pressure is less sodium absorption and more presentation of sodium to the loop of Henle, and therefore more excretion (see Figure 7–10). Pressure natriuresis and diuresis 

Figure 7–10. Response of the kidneys to an increase in blood pressure (natriuresis/ diuresis). Part of the intermediate-term response to increases in blood pressure is to re­duce blood volume (in an attempt to match blood volume with the capacity of the vas­cular tree). There are several mechanisms for this response. By far, the most important is a reduction in proximal tubular sodium reabsorption because of a reduction in the num­ber of functional transporters (Na-H antiporters) in the apical membrane of the proximal tubule epithelial cells. The reduction is probably in response to reduced levels of angio­tensin II. There is also an increase (usually small) in glomerular .ltration rate (GFR) and an increase in peritubular hydrostatic pressure and renal interstitial pressure that favor reduced absorption of salt and water in the cortex (particularly from the proximal neph­ron). ECF, extracellular .uid. 
serves as a kind of backup system that comes into play if fast-acting re.ex systems of regulating blood pressure fail to completely correct large increases. 
If peritubular levels of angiotensin II are kept constant by experimental means, pressure natriuresis and diuresis are strongly blunted or even eliminated. The ef­fect of maintaining constant sympathetic transmitters is similar but not so pro­nounced. Thus, the same agents that directly a.ect vascular peripheral resistance to correct blood pressure (sympathetic transmitters and angiotensin II) also a.ect tubular reabsorption to correct ECF volume. 
A key feature of pressure natriuresis and diuresis is that the degree of salt and water excretion for a given rise in pressure varies with the volume status of the body. Even though pressure natriuresis is turned on strictly by intrarenal mecha­nisms, the amount that occurs can be dampened by external factors. If the ECF volume is normal or high and the renal artery pressure rises, pressure natriuresis and diuresis are very e.ective in increasing excretion of sodium and water and reducing blood volume. On the other hand, if ECF volume is low and the renal artery pressure rises, there is much less salt and water loss. It appears that the vol­ume status of the body acts as a gain control on pressure natriuresis and diuresis.4 There is potent pressure natriuresis and diuresis when ECF volume is high, and much less pressure natriuresis and diuresis when ECF volume is depleted. Under normal conditions, pressure natriuresis and diuresis is a proximal nephron mecha­nism that is very important for dumping sodium and water when blood pressure is too high. It does this by reducing isotonic reabsorption of salt and water from the proximal convoluted and straight tubule. 

Peritubular-Capillary Starling Factors and the Role of Renal Interstitial Hydraulic Pressure 
Changes in GFR, besides directly a.ecting the .ltered volume, also a.ect reab­sorption of that volume. A rise in either peritubular capillary pressure or intersti­tial pressure reduces net reabsorption (and therefore causes more excretion). From the viewpoint of Starling forces acting on the capillary, it should be obvious that high capillary pressure opposes reabsorption. But high interstitial pressure should favor reabsorption, so why does it also oppose it? First, an increased interstitial pressure causes back-leak of reabsorbed .uid from the interstitial space across the tight junctions into the tubule. Thus, this pressure does not alter the cellular trans­port mechanisms for sodium and water but rather reduces the net reabsorption achieved by these mechanisms, particularly in the “leaky” proximal tubule. In e.ect, if the interstitium gets “too full,” then it is di.cult to transport more .uid into it. Put another way, high interstitial pressure does more to oppose the move­ment of .uid from tubule to interstitium than it does to promote the movement of .uid from interstitium to capillary. 
A decrease in peritubular-capillary oncotic pressure (pPC) also opposes reab­sorption. Of course, the new question is: How do changes in GFR cause changes in PPC and pPC? We already know the answers to this question from Chapter 2: 
4The only known way this can occur is via signals originating in cardiopulmonary baroreceptors and trans­mitted to the kidneys via renal nerves. However, there are probably other factors. 
PPC is set by (1) arterial pressure and (2) the combined vascular resistances of the a.erent and e.erent arterioles, which determine how much of the arterial pres­sure is lost by the time the peritubular capillaries are reached. pPC is set by (1) arterial oncotic pressure and (2) .ltration fraction (GFR/RPF), which determine how much of the oncotic pressure increases from its original arterial value during passage through the glomeruli. 
Teleologically, it makes sense that PPC and pPC in.uence interstitial pressure and, hence, sodium reabsorption because these phenomena are simply a logical continuation of the .ow diagrams we have used previously for studying the ho­meostatic control of GFR. Events initiated by .uid loss from the body end with 3 changes that lower GFR: increased constriction of the a.erent and e.erent arteri­oles (induced by the renal nerves and angiotensin II), decreased arterial hydraulic pressure, and increased arterial oncotic pressure. Figure 7–10 illustrates how these same 3 factors also decrease renal interstitial hydraulic pressure and, hence, in­crease sodium reabsorption. Thus, homeostatic responses that tend to lower GFR in response to a reduction in body sodium also usually increase sodium reabsorp­tion, the “desired” homeostatic event of preserving volume in response to bodily .uid depletion. 
The same logic applies when the desired homeostatic responses are increased GFR and decreased sodium reabsorption so as to eliminate excess sodium from the body. Thus, when a high-salt diet or expansion of the ECF volume from some other physiological cause is the primary event, the following occurs: (1) decreased plasma oncotic pressure (resulting from dilution of plasma proteins), (2) increased arterial pressure, and (3) renal vasodilation secondary to decreased activity of the renal sympathetic nerves and decreased angiotensin II. Simultaneously, then, the GFR increases a small amount and so does interstitial pressure, which reduces .uid reabsorption. Figure 7–10 illustrates these natriuretic responses to a rise in arterial pressure. 

Glomerulotubular Balance 
As stated earlier, in the regulation of sodium excretion, the control of tubular sodium reabsorption is more important than control of GFR. One reason for this is that a change in GFR automatically induces a proportional change in the reab­sorption of sodium by the proximal tubules, so that the fraction reabsorbed (but not the total amount) remains relatively constant (Table 7–1). This phenomenon has the rather ungainly name of glomerulotubular balance. In response to a pri­mary change in GFR, the percentage of the .ltered sodium reabsorbed proxi­mally remains approximately constant (about 65%). The fraction not reabsorbed also remains approximately constant (about 35%). Therefore, a change in GFR is still re.ected as a change in the sodium and water presented to the loop of Henle. Glomerulotubular balance does not mean that proximal reabsorption is always exactly 65% of .ltered sodium. It only says that when the fraction reabsorbed is changed, the change is caused by processes other than changes in GFR. Several mechanisms are manifested in the proximal tubule to stimulate sodium reabsorp­tion (raise the percentage reabsorbed above 65%) or inhibit sodium reabsorption (lower the percentage below 65%). 
Table 7–1. E.ect of “perfect” glomerulotubular balance on the mass of  sodium leaving the proximal tubule 

0.062 145 9 6 3 
The net result of .xed fractional reabsorption is to reduce the magnitude of di.erence in sodium leaving the proximal tubule. 
The mechanisms responsible for matching changes in tubular reabsorption to changes in GFR are completely intrarenal (ie, glomerulotubular balance requires no external neural or hormonal input; indeed, the presence of such input usually obscures the existence of glomerulotubular balance, as described previously). 
Glomerulotubular balance is actually a second line of defense preventing changes in renal hemodynamics per se from causing large changes in sodium ex­cretion. The .rst line of defense is autoregulation of GFR, described in Chapter 2 and in the prior discussion of tubuloglomerular feedback. GFR autoregulation prevents GFR from changing too much in direct response to changes in blood pressure, and glomerulotubular balance blunts the sodium-excretion response to whatever GFR change does occur. Thus, tubuloglomerular feedback and glom­erulotubular balance mediated by GFR autoregulation are processes that allow a large fraction of the responsibility for homeostatic control of sodium excretion to reside in those primary inputs that act to in.uence tubular reabsorption of sodium independently of GFR changes. 
Before describing the mechanisms of long-term control in the next section we want to point out 2 key features of the renal handling of sodium. First, inter­actions between the various mechanisms we have described thus far allow the kidneys to be true integrators of signals that are sometimes in con.ict. A good example is the case of prolonged aerobic exercise, speci.cally marathon running. Well-trained, well-hydrated athletes running marathons on cool days (thus elimi­nating excessive loss of sodium as a confounding factor) exercise intensely for well over 2 h with an elevated blood pressure. Systolic pressure is typically elevated by 50%, while MAP is elevated about 20%. Acting alone this rise in pressure should induce vigorous pressure natriuresis. But it does not. If anything, renal excretion of sodium is decreased in these conditions because other signals override pressure natriuresis. 

We also want to point out that all the mechanisms described so far lead to co-regulation of solute and water, ie, they tend by themselves to increase or decrease the excretion of sodium and water in exact parallel. This is very e.ective as a coarse control over ECF volume. However, sodium ingestion 
and water ingestion are both highly variable and often unrelated to each other. If one is ingested in excess of the other, the body has to excrete more of whichever one is in excess. Such independent control requires additional mechanisms not operative in the proximal tubule. Most of the processes for independent control of sodium and water balance occur in the distal nephron (not surprising because the distal nephron represents mammalian evolutionary adaptation to a terrestrial environment). 

Long-Term Control: Aldosterone Regulation of Sodium Balance 

In the face of a constant rate of ingestion of salt and water, correction of 
a sustained decrease in blood pressure requires a decrease in renal excre­
tion of salt and water until the transient positive .uid balance returns blood volume to normal. A major control over the reabsorption of sodium in the distal nephron involves the hormone aldosterone. The primary e.ect of aldoste­rone is to increase sodium reabsorption in the connecting tubules and collecting ducts. Aldosterone-stimulated sodium retention is an e.ector system that is vital in correcting prolonged reductions in blood pressure. The most important physi­ological factor controlling circulating levels of aldosterone is the circulating level of angiotensin II. Thus, a decrease in blood pressure produces a rapid short-term baroreceptor-mediated vascular response followed by the intermediate-term renal-mediated release of renin and production of angiotensin II, which reinforces the initial short-term vascular response. However, even if the blood pressure returns to near normal, the circulating angiotensin II will stimulate the adrenal cortex to produce aldosterone.5 This targets the distal nephron to increase sodium reabsorp­tion and thus increase total body sodium and blood volume to produce a long­term correction to total body sodium content and mean blood pressure. 
Aldosterone stimulates sodium reabsorption mainly in the cortical connecting tubule and cortical collecting duct, speci.cally by the principal cells. An action on this late portion of the nephron is what one would expect for .ne-tuning the output of sodium, because more than 90% of the .ltered sodium has already been reabsorbed by the time the .ltrate reaches the collecting-duct system. 
The total quantity of sodium reabsorption dependent on the in.uence of aldo­sterone is approximately 2% of the total .ltered sodium. Thus, all other factors re­maining constant, in the complete absence of aldosterone, a person would excrete 2% of the .ltered sodium, whereas in the presence of maximal plasma concentra­tions of aldosterone, virtually no sodium would be excreted. Two percent of the .ltered sodium may seem small but is actually large because of the huge volume of glomerular .ltrate: 
Total .ltered Na/day  GFR  PNa  180 L/day  145 mmol/L  26,100 mmol/day 
5Circulating angiotensin II has a very short plasma half-life; thus, continued stimulation of aldosterone secretion requires the continued production of angiotensin II. 
Thus, aldosterone controls the reabsorption of 0.02  26,100 mmol/day  522 mmol/day. In terms of sodium chloride, the form in which most sodium is in­gested, this amounts to the control of approximately 30 g NaCl/day, an amount considerably more than the average person consumes. Therefore, by control of the plasma concentration of aldosterone between minimal and maximal, the excre­tion of sodium can be .nely adjusted to the intake so that total-body sodium and ECF volume remain constant. (Interestingly, aldosterone also stimulates sodium transport by other epithelia in the body, namely, sweat and salivary ducts and the intestine. The net e.ect is the same as that exerted on the kidney: movement of sodium from lumen to blood. Thus, aldosterone is an all-purpose stimulator of sodium retention.) In the kidney, aldosterone acts like many other steroid hor­mones. As a molecule, it has enough lipid character to freely cross principal cell membranes, after which it combines with mineralocorticoid receptors in the cy­toplasm. Aldosterone-bound receptors undergo a change in conformation that reveals a formerly hidden nuclear localization signal. After being transported to the nucleus, the receptor acts as a transcription factor that promotes gene expres­sion and synthesis of messenger RNA (mRNA). The mRNA mediates the transla­tion of speci.c proteins. The e.ect of these proteins is to increase the activity or number of luminal membrane sodium channels and basolateral membrane Na-K-ATPase pumps to exactly supply what is needed to promote increased reabsorp­tion of sodium (Figure 7–11). 

Figure 7–11. Mechanism of aldosterone action. Aldosterone enters principal cells and interacts with cytosolic aldosterone receptors. The aldosterone-bound receptors in­teract with nuclear DNA to promote gene expression. The aldosterone-induced gene products activate sodium channels and sodium pumps to increase sodium reabsorption. Glucocorticoids such as cortisol are also capable of binding to the aldosterone receptor. However, they are inactivated by 11ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11ß-HSD). 

Control of Aldosterone Secretion 
Several inputs to the adrenal gland regulate aldosterone secretion and play a role in electrolyte balance. The most important is angiotensin II produced by the global RAS. In addition, elevated plasma potassium concentration, as described in Chapter 8 in the context of the renal handling of potassium, stimulates aldo­sterone secretion, while the atrial natriuretic factors (discussed later) inhibit aldo­sterone secretion. 
As described earlier, the plasma concentration of angiotensin II is determined mainly by the plasma concentration of renin. Accordingly, control of aldosterone secretion in sodium-regulating re.exes is determined by those factors that regulate renin secretion (ie, intrarenal baroreceptors, macula densa, and renal sympathetic nerves). Thus, when plasma volume is reduced, eg, by a low-sodium diet, hemor­rhage, or diarrhea, renin secretion is stimulated, which leads, via angiotensin II, to an increased aldosterone secretion. This hormone then stimulates sodium re-absorption (Figure 7–12). In contrast, when a person ingests a high-sodium diet, renin secretion is reduced, which leads, via a reduced plasma angiotensin II, to decreased aldosterone secretion. 

Tubuloglomerular Feedback and Autoregulation Revisited 
Responses to cardiopulmonary, arterial, and intrarenal baroreceptors are extremely e.ective mechanisms for controlling blood volume. Part of this control causes changes in GFR, mediated by changes in a.erent arteriolar resistance. Although this change in a.erent resistance has the e.ect of altering GFR in a manner nec­essary to correct blood volume, it has the additional e.ect of altering RBF and pressure in the glomerular capillaries that may have the deleterious consequences described in Chapter 2. Substantial reductions in RBF severely compromise al­ready oxygen-poor regions of the kidney like the medulla. Substantial increases in glomerular capillary pressures are likely to damage the glomeruli. In addition, the ability of the kidney to correct total body electrolyte and water imbalances de­pends on keeping tubular .ow (ie, GFR) within a certain limited range. Therefore, the kidneys have speci.c mechanisms for blunting responses that would otherwise lead to excessively large changes in GFR or RBF. These mechanisms are auto-regulation and tubuloglomerular feedback. It is important to emphasize that these mechanisms do not block changes in GFR and renal blood .ow; they simply keep the changes from becoming excessive. 
Autoregulation of GFR involves local production of prostaglandins in condi­tions when strong vasoconstriction might by itself reduce GFR and renal blood .ow too much (high sympathetic stimulation and high levels of angiotensin II). Intrarenal (autoregulatory) prostaglandin production opposes the actions of an­giotensin II on the kidneys, ie, prostaglandins lead to vasodilation of arterioles and relaxation of mesangial cells (Figure 7–8). Increased local (intrarenal) an­giotensin II concentrations associated with renin release and increased sympa­thetic input stimulate the production of prostaglandins. The vasodilatory e.ect 

Figure 7–12. Response of the RAS to a fall in blood pressure. Increased secretion of re­nin leads via increased circulating angiotensin II to the stimulation of aldosterone secre­tion. The aldosterone stimulates tubular sodium reabsorption, thereby preserving body stores of sodium. 
of prostaglandins dampens the e.ect of angiotensin II and sympathetic input on renal arterioles and permits a reasonable, but reduced blood .ow and GFR to continue (see Figure 7–13). 
Tubuloglomerular feedback, alternatively, is associated with the macula densa sodium chloride load detector and plays a major role in conditions when GFR is very high (eg, volume overload). Recall from the previous discussion that large loads of sodium chloride in the thick ascending limb lead to inhibition of renin release. The macula densa cells at the end of the thick ascending limb have Na-K­2Cl symporters that can avidly take up Na, Cl, and K and cause the cells to swell dramatically when GFR (NaCl delivery) is high (see Figure 7–9). The increased Na and Cl in the lumen of the thick ascending limb stimulate the Na-H anti-porter and depolarizes the cells (as in thick ascending limb cells, the K recycles via K channels). This depolarization leads to Ca entry across the basolateral mem­brane. The rise in Ca leads to the release of ATP from the basolateral surface of 

Figure 7–13. Prostaglandins mediate autoregulatory responses. Production of prosta­glandins (mostly PGE2) near the glomerulus relaxes the a.erent arteriole and thus coun­teracts the contractile e.ects of renal sympathetic nerve activation and angiotensin II. 
the cells in close proximity to the glomerular mesangial cells. This ATP stimu­lates purinergic P2 receptors on the mesangial cells and a.erent arteriolar smooth muscle cells. P2 receptor stimulation increases Ca in these cells and promotes contraction. In addition, it is the increased Ca in the a.erent arteriolar cells that reduces renin secretion. The ATP may also be metabolized to adenosine, which can stimulate adenosine receptors that produce the same result as the P2 recep­tors (in contrast to the vasodilatory actions of adenosine in most other tissues).6 Contraction of mesangial cells decreases the e.ective .ltration area, which de­creases GFR. Contraction of the a.erent arteriolar smooth muscle cells increases a.erent resistance and decreases RBF and GFR7 (see Figures 7–14 and 7–15). 
6The actions of adenosine in a given cell depend on the type of purinergic receptor and the signaling pathway initiated on binding of adenosine, similar to the situation with adrenergic receptors, in which an array of receptor types permits a variety of responses to any given agonist. 7The increase in intracellular Ca of the granular cells inhibits their production of intrarenal renin, thus reducing local production of angiotensin II and of prostaglandins, which would normally counteract the vasoconstrictive e.ects of the purinergic agonists. Another mediator—nitric oxide (NO)—is not a factor in initiating tubuloglomerular feedback but does appear to play a secondary role to sustain the tubulo­glomerular feedback once it has been initiated. The net e.ect of tubuloglomerular feedback is that the pressure natriuretic and diuretic responses are blunted (but not eliminated). 

Figure 7–14. Mechanism of tubuloglomerular feedback. Tubuloglomerular feedback acts to prevent changes in renal artery pressure from causing extreme changes in so­dium delivery to the macula densa. This mechanism acts in the opposite direction to the other re.exes and thus partially reduces or blunts their e.ectiveness. However, the over­all e.ect of an increase in renal artery pressure is still a net increase in sodium excretion (compare with Figure 7–10). GFR, glomerular .ltration rate; PGC, hydrostatic pressure in glomerular capillaries. 
The set of events just described is admittedly confusing, so the bottom line is this: high salt content in the thick ascending limb of a given nephron generates signals that reduce .ltration in that nephron, thus blunting (but not eliminating) the tendency to raise sodium excretion initiated by other process in conditions (eg, volume expansion) where the appropriate overall response is increased sodium excretion. 

ab 
Figure 7–15. An example of tubuloglomerular feedback. Changes in juxtaglomerular apparatus morphology during increasing tubular NaCl concentration from 25 (osmolali­ty  210 mOsm/kg/H2O) to 135 mmol (osmolality  300 mOsm/kg/H2O). Macula densa cell (arrowhead) swelling and parallel swelling/contraction of cells in the .nal part of the a.erent arteriole causes an almost complete closure of the arteriolar lumen (arrows), col­lapse of capillary loops (CAP), and shrinkage of the entire glomerulus (G). *, mesangial cells. Bar  10 µm. (From Peti-Peterdi J et al, Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2002;283:F197. Used with permission.) 

Other Mechanisms for Controlling Sodium Balance 
Although there are several other renal mechanisms for controlling sodium balance independent of water balance, under normal physiological circumstances none is as important as aldosterone. Only under certain pathophysiological conditions do these other mechanisms contribute signi.cantly to the regulation of sodium balance. 
NATRIURETIC PEPTIDES 
Several tissues in the body synthesize members of a hormone family called natri­uretic peptides, so named because they promote excretion of sodium in the urine. Key among these are atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and brain natriuretic pep­tide (BNP; named as such because it was .rst discovered in the brain). The main source of both natriuretic peptides is the heart. The natriuretic peptides have both vascular and tubular actions. They relax the a.erent arteriole, thereby promoting increased .ltration, and act at several sites in the tubule. They inhibit the release of renin, inhibit the actions of angiotensin II that normally promote reabsorption of sodium, and act in the medullary collecting duct to inhibit sodium absorption. The major stimulus for increased secretion of the natriuretic peptides is distention of the atria, which occurs during plasma volume expansion. This is probably the stimulus for the increased natriuretic peptides that occurs in persons on a high-salt diet. Although most experts assume that these peptides play some physiologi­cal role in the regulation of sodium excretion in this and other situations in which plasma volume is expanded, it is not currently possible to quantitate precisely their contribution, although it is surely less than aldosterone. As described later, these peptides are greatly elevated in patients with heart failure and serve as diagnostic indicators. 

ANTIDIURETIC HORMONE 
As described in Chapter 6, the major function of ADH is to increase the perme­ability of the cortical and medullary collecting ducts to water, thereby decreasing the excretion of water. In addition to this e.ect, ADH also increases sodium re-absorption by the cortical collecting duct, one of the same segments in.uenced by aldosterone. This e.ect is particularly evident when plasma aldosterone is elevated, and ADH’s action seems to synergize with the action of this steroid hormone. This makes teleological sense because, as discussed later, the secretion of ADH, like that of aldosterone, is stimulated when plasma volume is reduced. 

OTHER HORMONES 
Many well-known hormones not normally associated with renal function can ex­ert an in.uence on sodium reabsorption. Cortisol, estrogen, growth hormone, thyroid hormone, and insulin enhance sodium reabsorption, whereas glucagon, progesterone, and parathyroid hormone decrease it. When the level of any of these hormones is elevated (eg, estrogen during pregnancy), it will exert a signi.cant in.uence on sodium reabsorption and thus excretion. However, the secretion of these hormones, unlike the hormones described earlier, is not re.exively controlled speci.cally for the homeostatic regulation of sodium balance. 


Summary of the Control of Sodium Excretion 
The control of sodium excretion depends on the control of 2 variables of renal func­tion: GFR and rate of sodium reabsorption (Tables 7–2 and 7–3). The latter is con­trolled by the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone hormonal system, renal sympathetic nerves, direct e.ects of arterial blood pressure on the kidneys (pressure natriuresis), and atrial natriuretic factors. The renal interstitial hydraulic pressure and several renal paracrine agents play important roles in regulating sodium reabsorption. 
When considering mechanisms of sodium excretion, it is useful to consider 2 conceptually di.erent categories of mechanisms: (1) proximal nephron mecha­nisms (control of GFR, pressure natriuresis, and, to a lesser extent, changes in Starling forces) that lead to coupled changes in sodium and water excretion and 
(2) distal nephron e.ects in which sodium can be reabsorbed independently of water. The proximal mechanisms are primarily involved in excreting excess ECF volume, whereas the distal mechanisms alter sodium excretion when ingestion of sodium is not balanced by ingestion of water. Both types of mechanisms can alter blood pressure because of the intimate relationship among total body sodium and water, blood volume, and blood pressure. 
There is great .exibility in such a multifactor system. Thus, eg, although the renal sympathetic nerves in.uence GFR, renin secretion, renal interstitial hy­draulic pressure, and the tubular cells themselves, a transplanted and, therefore, denervated kidney maintains sodium homeostasis quite well because of the other 
Table 7–2. E.ects of renal nerve stimulation 
1 Stimulates renin secretion via a direct action on ß1-receptors of granular cells. 
2 Stimulates sodium reabsorption via a direct action on tubular cells (multiple recep­tors); one site a.ected is the proximal tubule. 
3 Stimulates a.erent and e.erent arteriolar constriction (a-adrenergic receptors). 
As a result: 
a GFR and RBF both decrease, the latter much more than the former. 
b The increased renal resistance decreases P , and the increased .ltration fraction 
PC
increases pPC. These changes cause renal interstitial hydraulic pressure to de­
crease, which stimulates sodium reabsorption, mainly in the proximal tubule. 
c The decreased GFR and the increased proximal sodium reabsorption (E.ects 2 and 3b) result in decreased delivery of .uid to the macula densa, which causes increased renin secretion in addition to that of E.ect 1 above. 
The three categories of renal nerve e.ects are listed in the order in which they are elicited as the frequency of renal nerve impulses is increased to higher and higher values. Nore that the direct e.ects on both renin secretion and sodium reabsorption occur at lower stimulation levels than those required elicit renal vasoconstriction. GFR, glomerular .ltration rate; RBF, renal blood .ow; PPC, peritubular-capillary hydralic pressure; pPC peritubular capillary oncotic pressure. 
Table 7–3. Changes in these factors in.uence sodium excretion in response to changes in plasma volume 
Filtration of sodium 
GFR Plasma sodium concentration (of minor importance except in severe disorders) 

Tubular reabsorption of sodium 
Arterial blood pressure e.ects on proximal reabsorption (pressure natriuresis) Aldosterone Peritubular capillary factors, acting via RIHP Renal nerves (direct tubular e.ects and indirect e.ects via angiotensin II and RIHP) Angiotensin II (direct tubular e.ects and indirect e.ect via RIHP) GFR (glomerulotubular balance) Atrial natriuretic factor Antidiuretic hormone 
GFR, glomerular .ltration rate; RIHP, renal interstitial hydraulic pressure. 
known nonneural factors involved. Overall, the one input whose absence causes the greatest di.culty in sodium regulation is aldosterone. 
In normal persons, the mechanisms for regulating sodium excretion are so pre­cise that sodium balance does not vary by more than a small percentage despite marked changes in dietary intake or losses caused by sweating, vomiting, diarrhea, hemorrhage, or burns. 


CONTROL OF WATER EXCRETION 

Over time, water excretion must meet the constraint of balance: match­
ing output to input. However, there is no physiological “water meter” to 
measure input. So output is not controlled by input. Instead, output is regulated by factors relating to the major “big picture” goals described in the in­troduction to this chapter. That is, maintain a volume su.cient to .ll the vascular space, and set an osmolality appropriate for a healthy environment of tissue cells. Then, it is not surprising that the major signals regulating water excretion origi­nate from baroreceptors that assess vascular fullness and osmoreceptors that assess plasma osmolality 
Water excretion conceptually consists of 2 major components: a proximal nephron component, in which water is absorbed along with sodium as an isotonic .uid, and a distal nephron component, in which water can be reabsorbed inde­pendent of sodium. The proximal nephron component is primarily a mechanism to regulate ECF volume in response to changes in blood pressure, while the distal nephron rate of water reabsorption is independent of sodium reabsorption. It is determined mainly by ADH, which increases the water permeability of the col­lecting ducts, thereby increasing water reabsorption and, hence, decreasing water excretion. Accordingly, total-body water is regulated mainly by re.exes that alter the secretion of ADH. 
ADH is a peptide produced by a discrete group of hypothalamic neurons whose cell bodies are located in the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei and whose ax­ons terminate in the posterior pituitary gland, from which ADH is released into the blood. The most important of the inputs to these neurons are from cardiovas­cular baroreceptors and osmoreceptors. 
Baroreceptor Control of ADH Secretion 
A decreased extracellular volume (eg, resulting from diarrhea or hemorrhage) re­.exively produces an increased aldosterone secretion. It also induces increased ADH secretion. The re.ex is mediated by neural input to the ADH-secreting neurons from both cardiopulmonary and arterial baroreceptors. 
Decreased cardiovascular pressures cause less .ring by the baroreceptors. Via a.erent neurons from the baroreceptors and ascending pathways to the hypothal­amus, this decreased baroreceptor .ring causes stimulation of ADH secretion. Conversely, the baroreceptors are stimulated by increased cardiovascular pres­sures, and this results in the inhibition of ADH secretion. The adaptive value of these baroreceptor re.exes is to help restore ECF volume and, hence, blood pres­sure (Figure 7–16). 
There is a second adaptive value to this re.ex: Large decreases in plasma volume elicit, by way of the cardiovascular baroreceptors, such high concentrations of ADH—much higher than those needed to produce maximal antidiuresis—that the hormone is able to exert direct vasoconstrictor e.ects on arteriolar smooth muscle. The result is increased total peripheral resistance, which helps raise arte­rial blood pressure independently of the slower restoration of body .uid volumes. 

Figure 7–16. Regulation of water balance. The 2 major pathways for altering total body water. On the left, changes in antidiuretic hormone (ADH) release from the anterior pi­tuitary are triggered by changes in blood volume. On the right, decreased osmolality causes swelling of osmoreceptor cells in the anterior hypothalamus, which inhibits their .ring and inhibits adjacent superoptic nuclei cells that reduces ADH secretion from their axonal extensions in the posterior pituitary. 
Renal arterioles and mesangial cells also participate in this constrictor response, and so a high plasma concentration of ADH, quite apart from its e.ect on tubu­lar water permeability, may promote the retention of both sodium and water by lowering GFR. 

Osmoreceptor Control of ADH Secretion 
We have seen how changes in ECF volume simultaneously elicit re.ex changes in the excretion of both sodium and water. This is adaptive because the situations causing ECF volume alterations are often associated with loss or gain of both so­dium and water in approximately proportional amounts. In contrast, we see now that changes in total-body water in which no change in total-body sodium occurs are compensated by alterations in water excretion but not in sodium excretion. 
The major e.ect of gaining or losing water without corresponding changes in sodium is a change in the osmolality of the body .uids. This is a key point because, under conditions of gain or loss of water without solute, the receptors that initiate the re.exes controlling ADH secretion are osmoreceptors: receptors responsive to changes in osmolality. Most osmoreceptors are located in tissues surrounding the 3rd cerebral ventricle. These tissues contain fenestrated capillaries, which allow rapid adjustment of interstitial composition when plasma composition changes. The hypothalamic cells that secrete ADH receive neural input from the osmore­ceptors.8 Via these connections, an increase in osmolality stimulates them and increases their rate of ADH secretion. Conversely, decreased osmolality inhibits ADH secretion (see Figure 7–16). For example, when a person drinks 1 L of water, the excess water lowers the body .uid osmolality, which re.exively inhibits ADH secretion via the hypothalamic osmoreceptors. As a result, water permeability of the collecting ducts becomes very low, little or no water is reabsorbed from these segments, and a large volume of extremely dilute (hypo-osmotic) urine is excreted. In this manner, the excess water is eliminated. 
Conversely, when a pure-water de.cit occurs (eg, because of water deprivation), the osmolality of the body .uids is increased, ADH secretion is re.exively stimu­lated, water permeability of the collecting ducts is increased, water reabsorption is maximal, and a very small volume of highly concentrated (hyperosmotic) urine is excreted. By this means, relatively less of the .ltered water than solute is excreted, which lowers body .uid osmolality toward normal. 
We have described 2 di.erent major a.erent pathways controlling the ADH-secreting hypothalamic cells: one from baroreceptors and one from osmoreceptors. These hypothalamic cells are, therefore, true integrators, whose rate of activity is determined by the total synaptic input to them. Thus, a simultaneous increase in plasma volume and decrease in body .uid osmolality cause strong inhibition of ADH secretion. Conversely, a simultaneous decrease in plasma volume and in­crease in osmolality produce very marked stimulation of ADH secretion. However, what happens when baroreceptor and osmoreceptor inputs oppose each other (eg, if plasma volume and osmolality are both decreased)? In general, because of the high sensitivity of the osmoreceptors, the osmoreceptor in.uence predominates over that of the baroreceptor when changes in osmolality and plasma volume are small to moderate. However, a very large change in plasma volume will take prece­dence over decreased body .uid osmolality in in.uencing ADH secretion; under such conditions, water is retained in excess of solute, and the body .uids become hypo-osmotic (for the same reason, plasma sodium concentration decreases). In essence, it is more important for the body to preserve vascular volume and thus ensure an adequate CO than it is to preserve normal osmolality. 
The ADH-secreting cells also receive synaptic input from many other brain ar­eas. Thus, ADH secretion and, hence, urine .ow can be altered by pain, fear, and a variety of other factors, including drugs such as alcohol, which inhibits ADH re­lease. However, this complexity should not obscure the generalization that ADH secretion is determined over the long term primarily by the states of body .uid osmolality and plasma volume. 
8Recent evidence suggests that there are both osmolality-sensing and direct sodium concentration-sensing cells in the brain, the latter via a special class of sodium channels located primarily in glial cells. In addi­tion, the ADH-secreting cells in the hypothalamus may also respond to osmolality in the cerebrospinal .uid, which responds on a slower time scale to changes in plasma composition. 
Several diseases (eg, diabetes insipidus, which is di.erent from diabetes mel­litus, also known as sugar diabetes) illustrate what happens when the ADH system is disrupted. Diabetes insipidus is characterized by a constant water diuresis, as much as 25 L/day. In most cases, people with diabetes insipidus have lost the ability to produce ADH because of damage to the hypothalamus or have lost the ability to respond to ADH because of defects in principal cell ADH receptors. Thus, collecting-duct permeability to water is low and unchanging regardless of extracellular osmolality or volume. In contrast, other diseases (eg, head trauma or brain tumors) are associated with inappropriately large secretion of ADH. As is predictable, patients with these diseases manifest decreased plasma osmolality (and sodium concentration) because of the excessive reabsorption of pure water. 
Figure 7–17 summarizes the major factors known to control renal sodium and water excretion in response to severe sweating. Sweat is a hypo-osmotic solution containing mainly water, sodium, and chloride. Therefore, sweating causes both a decrease in ECF volume and an increase in body .uid osmolality. The renal re­tention of water and sodium helps to compensate for the water and salt lost in the sweat. 

Thirst and Salt Appetite 
Large de.cits of salt and water can be only partly compensated by renal conserva­tion of these substances, and ingestion is the ultimate compensatory mechanism. The centers that mediate thirst are located in the hypothalamus (very close to those areas that produce ADH). The subjective feeling of thirst, which drives one to obtain and ingest water, is stimulated both by reduced plasma volume and by increased body .uid osmolality. The adaptive signi.cance of both are self-evident. Note that these are precisely the same changes that stimulate ADH production, and the receptors—osmoreceptors and the nerve cells that respond to the cardio­vascular baroreceptors—that initiate the ADH-controlling re.exes are near those that initiate thirst. The thirst response, however, is signi.cantly less sensitive than the ADH response. 
There are also other pathways controlling thirst. For example, dryness of the mouth and throat causes profound thirst, which is relieved by merely moistening them. Also, when animals such as the camel (and humans, to a lesser extent) be­come markedly dehydrated, they will rapidly drink just enough water to replace their previous losses and then stop. What is amazing is that when they stop, the water has not yet had time to be absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract into the blood. Some kind of metering of the water intake by the gastrointestinal tract has occurred, but its nature remains a mystery. 
Angiotensin II is yet another factor that stimulates thirst: by its direct e.ect on the brain. This hormone constitutes one of the pathways by which thirst is stimu­lated when ECF volume is decreased. 
Salt appetite, which is the analogue of thirst, is also an extremely important component of sodium homeostasis in most mammals. It is clear that salt appetite in these species is innate and consists of 2 components: (1) hedonistic appetite and 
(2) regulatory appetite. In other words, (1) animals like salt and eat it whenever 

Figure 7–17. Summary of major factors that increase tubular sodium and water reab­sorption in severe sweating. Although these mechanisms cannot restore lost volume, they act to preserve existing volume, and the thirst mechanism is invoked in parallel. (Antidiuretic hormone [ADH] also enhances sodium reabsorption, but this is a relatively minor e.ect and is not shown.) These changes, coupled with the decrease in GFR that also occurs, homeostatically reduce urinary sodium and water loss. (To visualize the re­sponse to a high-sodium diet or the infusion of saline, simply replace “severe sweating” with these events, reverse all the arrows in the boxes, and add an increase in atrial natri­uretic peptide, the result of atrial distention.) 
they can regardless of whether they are salt de.cient, and (2) their drive to obtain salt is markedly increased in the presence of de.ciency. 
The signi.cance of these animal studies for humans, however, is unclear. Salt craving does seem to occur in humans who are severely salt depleted, but the contribution of such regulatory salt appetite to everyday sodium homeostasis in normal persons is probably slight. On the other hand, humans do seem to have a strong hedonistic appetite for salt, as manifested by almost universally large intakes of sodium whenever it is cheap and readily available. Thus, the average American intake of salt is 10–15 g/day even though humans can survive quite nor­mally on less than 0.5 g/day. As pointed out previously, a large salt intake may be a contributor to the pathogenesis of hypertension in susceptible individuals. 

Congestive Heart Failure and Hypertension: Cardiovascular Pathologies That Involve Altered Sodium Excretion 
Congestive heart failure and hypertension involve perturbed renal handling of so­dium. In congestive heart failure and in most cases of hypertension, the perturbed renal function seems to lie in inappropriate signaling to the kidneys rather than pathology of renal transport mechanisms per se. 
Congestive heart failure is characterized by weak cardiac muscle that cannot increase CO to meet the demands of exercise and, more importantly, can only provide an adequate resting CO in the presence of excessive neurohumoral drive (something like a car operating on 2 cylinders that can only keep up speed when the accelerator is pushed to the .oor). The neurohumoral drive is characterized by high levels of renin, angiotensin II, aldosterone, catecholamines, and other mediators. Fluid volume is increased, leading to edema in the lungs, peripheral tissues, or both, which is why this is called congestive heart failure. Because of the high .uid volume, atrial pressures sensed by the cardiopulmonary baroreceptors are high. The high atrial pressures should lead to decreased ADH secretion and decreased sympathetic drive to the kidneys.9 Instead, these signals are increased, and the kidneys operate at a new setpoint in which normal sodium excretion only occurs at the expense of an excessive body .uid volume. If .uid volume is somehow restored to normal levels, renal excretion of sodium drops to very low levels. Another characteristic of congestive heart failure is high levels of natriuretic peptides. This is an appropriate response to the high atrial pressures and partially counteracts the sodium-retaining signals to the kidneys but does not restore so­dium output to a level that would occur in a healthy person who transiently devel­oped the high .uid volume that exists chronically in the heart failure patient. The high .uid volumes of congestive heart failure are deleterious to pulmonary func­tion and over time often lead to structural changes in the heart (dilation) that only exacerbate the defective pumping. Therapy for congestive heart failure includes the use of diuretics to reduce the high .uid volume and drugs that inhibit the generation of angiotensin II (ACE inhibitors) or block the actions of angiotensin II (angiotensin receptor antagonists). In addition, synthetic natriuretic peptides are becoming tools to promote diuresis. 
Hypertension is also a disease of abnormal sodium balance. Hypertension must always be associated with a blood volume and total body sodium content that is 
9In contrast to atrial pressures that are high, arterial pressure is usually within the normal range, and heart failure cannot be diagnosed based on arterial blood pressure. It may be that arterial pressure is actually a little below the setpoint of the brainstem vasomotor center, leading to the sympathetic drive associated with heart failure. However, there is no way to measure the setpoint and compare it with the pressures that actually exist in the arterial tree. 
too high for the volume of the vascular tree. In some cases, the reason for the ex­cess blood volume is clear. For example, renal glomerular disease often leads to inappropriate release of renin with subsequent increases in angiotensin II, aldo­sterone, collecting-tubule sodium reabsorption, and .nally an increase in blood pressure; a tumor of the adrenal cortex can lead to excess production of aldoste­rone and increases in blood pressure; or a speci.c gain of function mutation in the sodium reabsorptive mechanism in the collecting duct also leads to excess sodium reabsorption and profound hypertension. These 3 examples illustrate 3 types of defects in the complicated control mechanism for maintaining total body sodium and mean blood pressure. The .rst, excess renin production, is a problem with the sensing mechanism for the renal component of the blood pressure control system. The second, excess production of aldosterone, is a defect in the signaling mech­anism that lies between the sensor (pressure sensors in the large vessels and the kidney) and the e.ector (distal nephron sodium reabsorption). The third example is a defect in the e.ector system (distal nephron sodium reabsorption). In these cases, the defect is more or less obvious, and correcting the underlying pathology usually corrects the hypertension (ie, ACE inhibitors reduce the e.ect of excess renin, spironolactone will inhibit aldosterone receptors, and administration of amiloride will reduce sodium reabsorption by epithelial sodium channels). Renin levels, angiotensin levels, and aldosterone levels are normal or even reduced, and yet blood pressure is elevated as if the setpoint of the control loop from sensing blood pressure to sodium reabsorption is inexplicably high. The relatively normal levels of circulating renin, angiotensin II, and aldosterone imply that the defect in the regulation of sodium reabsorption lies subsequent to aldosterone interaction with the cells of the collecting tubule. One holy grail of hypertension research has been to de.ne the components responsible for controlling sodium reabsorption that are induced by aldosterone in an e.ort to intervene in the process that leads to increased total body sodium and increased blood pressure. 
KEY CONCEPTS 

Multiple overlapping mechanisms regulate sodium and water excretion; most are related to blood pressure. 
The medullary vasomotor center regulates blood pressure on a moment-to mo­ment basis via the baroreceptor re.ex and also regulates renal excretion of sodium and water. 
Angiotensin II is a crucial regulator of sodium excretion and blood pressure via its actions in the kidneys, peripheral vasculature, and adrenal glands. 
The regulation of sodium content is the ultimate determinant of blood pressure in the long term via control of extracellular .uid (ECF) volume. 

All the physiological controls in the proximal nephron a.ect the excretion of sodi­um and water together, whereas the actions of aldosterone and ADH in the distal nephron regulate sodium and water excretion independently. 
Long-term regulation of sodium excretion and, therefore, blood pressure centers on the actions of aldosterone. 
ADH secretion is regulated both by blood pressure, via the baroreceptor-vasomo­tor center system, and plasma osmolality via hypothalamic osmoreceptors. 


STUDY QUESTIONS 
7–1. In a canine experiment, a dog’s .ltered load of sodium in an isolated pump-per­fused kidney is found to be 15 mmol/min. (1) How much sodium do you predict remains in the tubule at the end of the proximal tubule? (2) If its GFR is suddenly in­creased by 33%, how much sodium now is left at the end of the proximal tubule? 
7–2. Normally aldosterone stimulates the reabsorption of approximately 33 g of so­dium chloride/day. If a patient loses 100% of adrenal function, will 33 g of sodium chloride be excreted per day inde.nitely? 
7–3. A patient has su.ered a severe hemorrhage and the plasma protein concentra­tion is normal. (Not enough time has elapsed for interstitial .uid to move into the plasma.) Does this mean that the peritubular-capillary oncotic pressure is also normal? 
7–4. If the right renal artery becomes abnormally constricted, what will happen to re­nin secretion by the right kidney and the left kidney? 
7–5. A patient is su.ering from primary hyperaldosteronism (ie, increased secretion of aldosterone caused by an aldosterone-producing adrenal tumor). Is plasma renin concentration higher or lower than normal? 
7–6. An agent that increases sodium and water excretion is called a diuretic (even though natriuretic is probably a better term). Block of sodium reabsorption in the proximal tubule, loop of Henle, distal tubule, or collecting duct all exert a diuretic e.ect. True or false? 
7–7. A person is given a drug that dilates both the a.erent and e.erent arterioles. Assuming no other action of the drug, what will happen to the percentage of .l­tered sodium that this person’s proximal tubule reabsorbs? 
7–8. A new drug is found to have dual actions: It blocks sodium entry pathways in the proximal tubule epithelium, and it binds to ADH receptors in the collecting ducts and mimics the actions of ADH. Will the .nal urine contain excess or low amounts of sodium and excess or low amounts of water, and will it be hyperosmotic, iso­osmotic, or hypo-osmotic? 
7–9. Another new drug also has dual actions, this time blocking sodium entry path­ways in the thick ascending limb and exerting ADH-like actions as in Question 7–8. 
Now will the .nal urine contain excess or low amounts of sodium and excess or low amounts of water, and will it be hyperosmotic, iso-osmotic, or hypo-osmotic? 7–10 Angiotensin II that is capable of regulating the kidneys is formed by enzymatic ac­tion in which locations (choose all that apply)? 
A. The adrenal glands 
B. The kidneys 
C. The hypothalamus 
D. The lungs 


SUGGESTED READING 
Cowley AW Jr, Liard JF, Guyton AC. Role of baroreceptor re.ex in daily control of arterial blood pressure and other variables in dogs. Circ Res. 1973;32:564. Eaton DC, Malik B, Ma H-P. Hypertension and sodium channel turnover. In: Principles of Molecular Medicine. 2nd ed. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press. 

